# Why build Omafano?

Photos are reified moments in time.  From vacation photos, to the first
steps of a baby, photos anchor our perception of life itself.

And yet, for an anchor, a digital photograph is remarkably ephemeral: it
could be lost if your phone dies, or your hard drive dies, or your
chosen web photo service decides to close up shop.

In a similar way, it is strange to see intimate, personal memories pass
through the hands of gigantic media corporations like Facebook or
Google, merely to end up as "content" bracketed by advertising.  You
literally give up the substance of your existence, only to have it sold
back to you, re-encoded at a lower bitrate.

And so, privacy-conscious people like you and me are faced with a
choice: hoard our photos on hard drives, stop taking photos altogether,
or just give in and share everything over the iCloud account that you
were forced to create.  These are all terrible options.  Photos that only
exist in one place are vulnerable to loss, and aren't doing their job of
brightening our present with happy reflections of the past.  Avoiding
photos altogether is a travesty, but at least it doesn't pave the path
towards a dystopian future of corporate surveillance.

There is another option, for the intrepid, which is to run your own
photo gallery software.  Hosting your own web site promotes the
autonomous network of peers that was at the heart of the original vision
of the internet.  It's also a more direct way of controlling what you
share and with whom: instead of telling Yahoo! how you would like your
photos to be stored and who your friends are, and trusting that a future
revision to their terms of service won't be incompatible with your
wishes, instead you cut out the untrustworthy intermediaries and do it
yourself.

Running your own software is not without its pitfalls, however.  Much of
the web photo gallery software out there was written in an earlier, more
na√Øve age of the internet -- security was often an afterthought, and
indeed the security needs of users were different.  These days with the
rise of peer surveillance, a simple "public versus private" security
toggle-switch is insufficient.  You want to share your life with
friends, family, and the world, but not everything to every person.
Still at a more basic level, older photo gallery software is often
vulnerable to attack by malicious strangers.

There is a place in this world for web photo gallery software that is
designed from the ground up with simplicity, security, autonomy, and
usability in mind.  We hope that Omafano can be that software.
